---
categories:
- Architecture
date: '2025-01-01'
draft: false
title: Architecture | Indigenous
type: docs
---

##### SOME THOUGHTS ON THE PROCESS OF WHITE-BLACK CROSS-CULTURAL FERTILISATION IN SOUTHERN AFRICA

Franco Frescura

> "_The new abode had just been erected by the firm of Messrs. Taylor at a cost of £3000, the money being raised by the sale of ostrich feathers and oxen. Sechele's establishment is more luxurious than that of any other of the Bechuana sovereigns, and he has quite adopted the European style of living_ ". Residence of Sechele, Chief of the Kwena, at Molepolole, 1873 (Holub, 1881: 320-321)

##### INTRODUCTION

The European mind has always somehow envisaged the African continent as being a place inhabited by strange peoples, endowed with fabulous treasures and filled with wondrous beasts. Plinius the Elder is recorded to have exclaimed once that "Ex Africa semper aliquid novi" or, translated, "there is always something new out of Africa", whilst Herodotus (c484-425BCE), wrote that:

> "_These Garamantes are accustomed to sit in Chariots, and hunt the Aethiopian Troglodytes; who are reported to be swifter on foot than any other Nation in the World. They feed upon Serpents and Lizards, with many other Kinds of Reptiles; and their Speech resembles the shrieking of a Bat rather than the Language of Man_." (Hallett, 1965)

Over the centuries the myth of a "_dark_ " continent continued to be fuelled by tales of amazons, women with two heads and eight breasts, the Christian empire of Prester John and the wealth of King Solomon's mines. The exploration of the central and southern regions during the nineteenth century only served to increase speculation, which was maintained well into the 1900s by books with such mysterious titles as "_Through Lands that were Dark_ " (Hawkins, 1914). These were supplemented by a whole genre of semi-fictional literature headed by such authors as Edgar Rice Burrows and Henry Rider Haggard, whose tales drew heavily upon Zulu and Swazi ethnography. In some instances the overlap between historical fact and speculative fiction was conveniently allowed to persist up to the modern era.

A good illustration of this was provided by the former Rhodesian regime of Ian Smith, who actively promoted the misconception that the settlement of Great Zimbabwe owed its origins to some mythical long-vanished race of people. It also attempted to suppress archaeological data which showed its builders to have been the ancestors of the local Shona. The idea that a "primitive" group of people could be capable of erecting "public works" of such magnitude clearly ran contrary to the White stereotype of the indigenous population. It also gave credibility to Black nationalist claims of the existence of an early and advanced Zimbabwean culture. (Frederikse, 1982)

At the same time European mentality, in its vanity, saw the presence of the White man as bringing a "_civilizing_ " and "_stabilising_ " influence upon the continent. The equation made between an industrial economy, a protestant work ethos, Christian morality and a White culture is repeated so often as to be unmistakable. Harvey Wilkinson, a missionary to the Transkei and a man not untypical of his time, claimed in 1898 that:

> "_We are surrounded here by a dark, dense mass of heathenism. Scenes new and strange to us meet our view every day. The country is densely populated, and these Pondos are low down in the scale of civilization._ " (1898: 357)

Today many of these tales, beliefs and prejudices have faded into the larger background and historical fabric of the continent, leaving behind them a rich mythological heritage. The idea however that the coming of White settlers to southern Africa initiated an era of cross-cultural borrowing which somehow changed the face of indigenous culture and improved the people's lifestyle, is a myth which has taken historians some time to comprehensively debunk (Peires, 1981; Guy, 1982; Delius, 1983; Bonner, 1983 et al). This was made all the more difficult by the fact that such claims, when applied to the local built environment and material culture, may be perceived to be outwardly valid. The fact that most rural builders have incorporated some modern industrial materials into their constructional process, and that some have changed their dwelling forms to adapt to a more "_modern_ " and "_urban_ " aesthetic, is inescapable. What is at issue therefore in this case is the extent of western technological and material spread, and whether such cross-borrowings can, in fact, be interpreted to be "_cultural"_.

##### PRAGMATIC ADAPTATION vs CULTURAL INFLUENCES

The hypothesis that the presence of an immigrant White culture could have exerted an influence upon the vernacular architecture of southern Africa will need to consider the following factors:

  1. Material application.
  2. Building technology.
  3. Dwelling form.
  4. Settlement pattern.

It is possible to argue, at this early stage, that the subject of dwelling form, with its attendant considerations of materials and technology, should be differentiated, in the discussion which follows, from that of settlement pattern. The reasons for this are evident. The first can be perceived to be part of a delicate social and environmental balance which links dwelling, materials and technology into an interdependent cycle of existence. In the eventuality of an imbalance being created by the introduction of sudden or radical innovations, they would tend to respond as an interacting whole, compensating for and adjusting to each other's changing status (Frescura, 1981a; NBRI, 1976; Hardie, 1980). These factors however, should only be seen as being relevant at the level of the individual dwelling unit. It is only seldom that they have any bearing upon the larger structuring of settlement patterns.

The latter, on the other hand, are also subject to social and environmental conditions but of a totally different nature. Not only do they act at a larger regional level of concern but are not directly inter-related, and hence are less vulnerable, to comparatively minor economic and physical fluctuations.

Some thought should also be given to the definition of exactly what constitutes a “ _foreign influence_ " and how pervasive it should have to become before it may be seriously considered to have undermined the traditional value systems of indigenous society, and hence its built environment. Vernacular architecture can hardly be described as being "_static_ ". Its links to the human and physical environment ensure that it is in a constant state of flux, responding and interacting with it as part of a continuous process of growth and transformation. Because it is a grass-root architecture, its range of dwelling forms, technologies and building materials has the ability to expand to incorporate any amount of innovation. In theory therefore, it would be possible to state that any building which meets with the basic criteria of "_found_ ” material and certain production processes could lay claim to the title of "_vernacular_ ". On the other hand such a structure would have to conform to other requirements of a historical and aesthetic nature before it could also be considered to be "_indigenous_ ". In reality, therefore, the dividing line between the two is not simple to define. The case histories quoted below illustrate this point.

  1. The rural builder of today tends to prefer the use, in the thatching process, of an industrial twine over the grass ropes and bark fibres of older times. The former is available, cheaply and easily, from the local trading store. It is also treated with tar and is therefore longer-lasting than the latter which require many hours of search and labour in the woods. Although the specific nature of the material has changed, the function has remained the same and neither the technology nor the dwelling aesthetic have been greatly affected by this cross-over.
  2. In the case of the Venda it was found that, in the 1920s, the threat of serious deforestation to the region had forced them to abandon their timber-intensive building technology of old and develop a new one based upon green brick construction. This was not devised locally but was the result of White missionary instruction at the nearby stations of Elim and Valdezia. The aesthetic of their traditional dwelling form, the cone on cylinder, sometimes with a verandah surrounding its perimeter, has, however, remained essentially unaltered. The dwellings are now fenestrated but their external appearance and internal space usages have changed little from those of previous generations.
  3. The example of the South Ndebele of the Middleburg-Groblersdal area is however, somewhat more complex to assess. Their homesteads are located on White-owned farms where they earn wages which are often supplemented from other sources. Living as they do near urban market places, many have accepted the easy availability of industrially-manufactured items and, over the years, have provided their dwellings with beds, cupboards and other artifacts. The difficulty of furnishing the circular plan of their older and more traditional structures with goods based upon right-angled construction has led them slowly to abandon the cone on cylinder in favour of square-plan forms. Although these are often thatched with grass, many are also built in green brick or clay, and roofed over with corrugated iron sheeting. Most outside as well as inside wall surfaces are usually painted over with complex and colourful designs, many of which are of obvious urban origins or inspired by such consumer-orientated products as motor-vehicles, trains, peanut commercials, Victorian architecture and many others (Frescura, 1981b, and others).  
The casual observer would have good reason to believe that here indeed was evidence of an incontrovertible nature to prove the case for cross-cultural impregnation. It is true of course that western artifacts can be seen to permeate most aspects of local architecture, building technology, decorative motifs and life styles. These facts however ignore the deeper symbolism inherent in both Ndebele wall decoration and their architecture. The first is an expression of local religion and politics as well as a reflection of the status of women in their society (Frescura, 1985) and is practiced independently of the dwelling's form. The second requires the observer to abandon western preconceptions of house as a single structure and extend this term to cover the homestead as a whole. This includes the concept of inside and outside living areas and views the single dwelling, regardless of its form and technology, as part of a larger hierarchical system of spaces. Over the years the Ndebele pattern of settlement has changed little from that which they practised in pre-industrial times, barring perhaps a degree of simplification brought on by a decrease in polygamous family groups. When viewed in this context therefore, it will be seen that their architecture has retained its essential and traditional character. The more romantic or pedantic may regret the passing of their earlier and "more historically correct" structures, but these have been replaced by an equally rich if more modern ethos. Besides, Ndebele society, like all human societies, is in a state of continuous flux and transition and it would be unrealistic to expect it to remain locked in some kind of cultural stasis (Spence and Biermann, 1954: 34-40) for the sake of romantic idealism.
  4. Finally there is the case of an admittedly rising number of urban and semi-urban families who are turning from the more overt manifestations of their rural architectural heritage and demanding a more modern aesthetic of their dwellings. Such homes are usually flat-roofed and multi-roomed. They are also built in a more conventional industrial technology which immediately removes them from the social processes of indigenous building and places their owners into a consumer-producer economic relationship. It would be wrong even here however, to view such developments in an entirely western light. Current housing experience in such urban areas as the Witwatersrand has shown that Black clients consistently show a preference for rear-located kitchens, even when it is impractical to place them there. Similarly, many western-looking residences located in the rural areas will often be found to have indigenous structures annexed to them as kitchens or as additional guest rooms.

These cases have manifold implications. Firstly, the adaptive and highly pragmatic nature of indigenous building has allowed for the inclusion of new materials and technologies into the vocabulary of vernacular construction. In many cases these have been incorporated without necessarily altering the form or the sense of the dwellings or giving up their textural richness.

Secondly, very few dwelling types have been lost to rural architecture as a result of material changes. If anything the range of forms being built has been widened.

Where changes have occurred in the traditional dwelling norms of an area, this has happened without there necessarily being parallel or resultant alterations in the structural hierarchy of local settlement patterns or, for that matter, in the usage of the dwelling unit itself.

Finally, even when the concept of a traditional homestead has been translated into a modern, extended-plan urban dwelling, certain planning priorities based upon cultural preferences have tended to emerge.

This means that the concept of what can be defined as "traditional", and what cannot, should be considered to be extremely flexible. To claim, for example, that no "true" indigenous architecture can exist in southern Africa, outside the bounds of a museum area, on the grounds that it has all been contaminated, to a greater or lesser degree, by White technology, is patently absurd. It would also be equally ridiculous to state that local building traditions have survived unscathed from foreign influence. They clearly have not. What does appear to be true however is that local builders have been pragmatic in their adoption of new technologies and dwelling forms, limiting their options to those elements which have suited their needs and rejecting most others which have not. This approach is compounded by the social mechanics of indigenous dwelling construction which militate against changes which are either too radical or too sudden.

It transpires, therefore, that what changes have occurred to the local built environment as a result of White or western influence have been largely limited to technological innovations or the transformation of the dwelling form. Although it is probable that, in the past, both may have had connotations of tradition and culture attached to them, in many cases these values have been transferred to the new technologies or structures. The settlement pattern, on the other hand, has not been subject to either and has therefore been able to survive largely untouched until comparatively recent times.

The degree to which the indigenous architecture of southern Africa can be seen to have been subjected to change of a White or western origin is therefore largely a matter of personal perception. Most western observers in the past have been domocentric, that is to say, orientated towards individual dwelling forms, and their reports of the local built environment were usually limited to accounts of domestic structures and granaries. Many examples of this have already been quoted during the course of earlier chapters. The more recent approach however has been to view the homestead as a whole, and although some changes may be perceived to have occurred even here, this element of the local built environment can generally be considered to have altered very little in most areas up to the 1930s. Thereafter however the rural picture becomes more fluid as a shortage of land and the growth of larger semi-urban concentrations begin to impinge upon an already impoverished rural economy. The subsequent decrease in the number of larger homesteads which occurs after this time can probably be attributed to these factors, although the growth of a missionary influence, leading to a drop in polygamous marriages, cannot be ruled out altogether as a contributory element.

##### CONCLUSIONS

This paper has attempted to establish some guidelines as to how much innovation of an urban and industrial nature can be said to be assimilated by local vernacular architecture before its indigenous and rural status becomes threatened. What has emerged, in the process, is the fact that change can be perceived to have occurred at a number of levels: material, technological, dwelling form and settlement pattern. It was shown that although in many cases these elements individually could bear a small degree of alteration, when this was exceeded it tended to have a ripple effect into the others as well. Generally however, settlement pattern could be seen to stand apart from those considerations surrounding the individual dwelling unit. The first has its structural principles firmly rooted in social hierarchies, the second in pragmatic decisions of shelter. Therefore the dwelling unit is thought to have been far more vulnerable to change than was larger settlement form. Whether however such change could be interpreted as being "cultural" in nature is a question which is still open to discussion.

With these points in mind, it becomes possible to arrive at certain conclusions of a historical nature. The accounts of early travellers to the region gave little idea of the social structures involved in indigenous settlement patterns. Their descriptions concentrated largely upon the local dwelling form and its construction and little was ever said of hierarchical distributions of huts or the functions of external spaces. However, if we can now accept the fact that changes to the habitat began with the technology of building and the form of the structure and only later spread to the pattern of settlement, then the whole question of White-Black cross-cultural pollination begins to fall into its correct perspective. In these terms it may be seen that although in some cases an element of dwelling aesthetic may have been involved in the identification of regional identities, the larger burden for this fell upon the settlement form, it being a more direct reflection of local social hierarchies, kinship and political systems and economic activity. Therefore although the rural dwelling unit can be perceived have undergone a measure of westernisation, in cultural terms this influence can be considered to be superficial and perhaps even transitional. The real impact of cross-cultural fertilisation should have manifested itself at the larger level of homestead settlement. As however, current research has shown that many of the traditional values attached to it persist to the present day, this study must come to the conclusion that the rural built environment has succeeded in retaining its essentially indigenous character despite the fact that local culture has been in intermittent contact with immigrant influences for over four hundred years.

##### POSTSCRIPT

This paper was originally presented at a conference on Socio-Economic Development in Historic Perspective, held at UPE in July 1990, under the title of Colonialism as a Factor in the Development of A Southern African Indigenous Vernacular Architecture. To the best of my knowledge, it must still to be published.

##### BIBLIOGRAPHY

> BIERMANN, Barrie. 1971. "Indlu: the Domed Dwelling of the Zulu". In Shelter in Africa, Editor Paul Oliver. London: Barrie and Jenkins.  
>  FREDERIKSE, Julie. 1982. None but Ourselves. Johannesburg: Ravan Press.  
>  FRESCURA. Franco. 1981a. Rural Shelter. Johannesburg: Ravan Press.  
>  1981b. "Kwa Mapoch - An Ndebele Village". Johannesburg: ISAA.  
>  1985\. Major Developments in the Rural Indigenous Architecture of Southern Africa of the Post-Difaqane Period. Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.  
>  HALLETT. Robin. 1965. The Penetration of Africa to 1815. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.  
>  HARDIE, Graham. 1980. Tswana Design of House and Settlement: Continuity and Change in Expressive Space. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Boston University Graduate School.  
>  HAWKINS, FH. 1914. Through Lands that were Dark. London: London Missionary Society.  
>  HOLUB, Dr Emil. 1881. Seven Years in South Africa. London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle and Rivington.  
>  KUPER, Adam. 1980. "Symbolic Dimensions of the Southern Bantu Homestead". Africa, Vol 5O, No 1, 1980. 18-23.  
>  MATTHEWS, Thomas. 1971. "Tribal Painting in South Africa, with Particular Reference to Xhosa Painting". Unpublished DLitt. et Phil, University of South Africa, Pretoria.  
>  NBRI. 1976. A Survey of Housing Functions in the Ndebele Homeland. Pretoria: NBRI.  
>  RICH, Peter. 1982. "The Bantwane Settlement at Kwarrielaagte". Architecture SA, November/December 1982: 38-43.  
>  SPENCE, Betty and BIERMANN, Barrie. "M'pogga". The Architectural Review, July 1954, 34-40.  
>  VOGEL, Catherine. 1983. "The Traditional Mural Art of the Pedi of Sekhukhuneland". Unpublished MA Dissertation, Faculty of Arts, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.  
>  WILKINSON, Harvey. 1898. From Namaqualand to Pondoland. The Methodist Churchman, Vol III, No 75, 8 January 1898. 357.

Copyright @ francofrescura.co.za